DIGITAL HEALTH IMPLEMENTATION
PLAYBOOK SERIES
Telehealth
Implementation
Playbook

AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION®
TELEHEALTH IMPLEMENTATION PLAYBOOK
THIS AMA® TELEHEALTH IMPLEMENTATION PLAYBOOK
is for informational purposes only. It is not intended as medical, legal, financial, or consulting
advice, or as a substitute for the advice of a physician, attorney, or other financial or consulting
professional. It does not imply and is not intended as a promotion or endorsement by the AMA
of any third-party organization, product, drug, or service. The opinions expressed by individuals
in this Playbook represent the views of the individuals themselves and not those of the AMA.
Reimbursement-related information provided by the AMA and contained within this Playbook
is for medical coding guidance purposes only. It does not (i) supersede or replace the AMA’s
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT®) manual (“CPT Manual”) or other coding authority,
(ii) constitute clinical advice, (iii) address or dictate payer coverage or reimbursement
policy, and (iv) substitute for the professional judgment of the practitioner
performing a procedure who remains responsible for correct coding.
CPT © Copyright 2022 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. AMA
and CPT are registered trademarks of the American Medical Association
(more information can be found here).
© 2022 American Medical Association
https://www.ama-assn.org/terms-use

Table of Contents
PART 1 / WARM-UP 6
Introduction to the Digital Health Implementation Playbook 8
Introduction to Digital Health Solutions 9
What is Telehealth? 10
Telehealth in Practice 13
Continuity of Care 13
Licensure 14
Reimbursement 15
The Path to Implementation 16
PART 2 / PRE-GAME 18
Step 1 / Identifying a Need 20
Step 2 / Forming the Team 24
Step 3 / Defining Success 28
Step 4 / Evaluating the Vendor 32
Step 5 / Making the Case 38
Step 6 / Contracting 42
PART 3 / GAME TIME – TELEHEALTH 46
Step 7 / Designing the Workflow 48
Step 8 / Preparing the Care Team 54
Step 9 / Partnering with the Patient 58
Step 10 / Implementing 64
Step 11 / Evaluating Success 68
Step 12 / Scaling 72
PART 4 / POST-GAME – RESOURCES 78

4

“With the evolving COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on access to medical care, there
is no better time to help physicians navigate and implement telemedicine into their
practices and enhance their ability to care for patients. Through telemedicine, we can
triage patients and help avoid unnecessary visits to health care settings, thereby
reducing exposure to the COVID-19 virus and helping to keep our front lines
safe, ensuring they have the resources needed to take on this immense
challenge. The tools and guidelines being created now are
already helping many to use telemedicine and will
continue to help define its role at this moment,
and shape the future of physician practice.”
—DR. RUSSELL LIBBY,
PEDIATRICIAN & BOARD MEMBER,
PHYSICIANS FOUNDATION
Telehealth & COVID-19
It is of paramount behavioral health patients who may and updates on COVID-19 and the
require routine check-ins. AMA’s physician resources, visit the
importance to keep
COVID-19 Resource Center
By reducing unnecessary visits
physicians, health care
for Physicians.
to health care environments, we
workers, and patients
can curb the exposure to and In addition to this resource, if
safe amid infectious transmission of infectious disease, you are working to optimize and
while helping to keep our front sustain telehealth in your practice,
disease outbreaks such as
lines safe and ensure they have the the American Medical Association
the COVID-19 pandemic.
resources needed to take on this also recommends visiting the AMA
immense challenge. Telehealth has Telehealth Quick Guide resource
Telehealth has supported physical
been particularly crucial throughout and accessing the AMA STEPS
distancing efforts and helped to
the current pandemic. Forward™ Innovation Academy
ensure that care continues to be
Telehealth Immersion Program.
provided to those who need it The American Medical Association
most by triaging low-risk urgent is committed to supporting and
care and follow-up appointments advocating for physicians and
while maintaining continuity of care, practices throughout the COVID-19
especially for chronic disease and pandemic. For the latest information
5

Part 1:
Warm-up
Before you embark on your
telehealth implementation,
it’s important to understand
what telehealth is and how it’s
impacting the world of health care.
In this section of the Playbook,
we’ll define telehealth and explain
how to use the resources included
in this document.
6

7

PART 1 / WARM-UP
Introduction to the Digital Health
Implementation Playbook
Digital tools that enable new methods and modalities to improve health care,
enable lifestyle change, and create efficiencies are proliferating quickly. Clinical
integration of these tools is lacking. We want to change that.
At the AMA, we are committed WHO IS THIS PLAYBOOK SERIES FOR? WHEN SHOULD I USE THE
PLAYBOOK SERIES?
to partnering with physicians to
This series is intended for those
meet the changing landscape Refer to this series of Playbooks
who believe in the importance of
of health care. Recent research1 whenever you are considering
digital health and its role in helping
found that physicians had four key the implementation of a digital
deliver better care. Whether you are
requirements for the adoption of health solution. By adopting these
a physician, a care team member,
digital health in practice: solutions now, your organization
a health care administrator, or
can improve its ability to deliver on
• Does it work? a passionate advocate for the
the Quadruple Aim of Healthcare,
• Will I receive payment? implementation of digital health
inclusive of Health Equity5.
• Will I be liable? technology, if you are looking for
• Will it work in my practice? guidance to navigate the process and
WHERE CAN I USE THE
achieve scale, this series of Playbooks PLAYBOOK SERIES?
In support of that pursuit, we have
is for you.
The Playbooks are designed for care
collaborated2 with physicians,
teams and administrators in medical
care team members, patients, and WHY SHOULD I USE THE PLAYBOOKS?
practices of all sizes and areas of
thought leaders to create the
Implementing digital health
specialty. We have consulted with
Digital Health3 Implementation
technology can be complicated
small private practices and large
Playbook Series.
and time-consuming. On average,
health systems, in rural and urban
it takes hospitals 23 months to go
WHAT IS A DIGITAL HEALTH settings, with high-income and
IMPLEMENTATION PLAYBOOK? from identifying a digital innovation
Medicaid-dependent populations.
need to scaling a digital solution
Months of research compiled into No matter where you are, you
to meet that need4. The Playbook
a Playbook documenting the most can use this Playbook as a guide
series has been designed with input
efficient path to implementing to successfully implement digital
from over 140 physicians, care team
a new digital health solution, health solutions in your practice.
members, health care administrators,
including key steps, best practices,
and digital health thought leaders to
and resources to accelerate and
help health care organizations adopt
achieve digital health adoption.
change faster and more successfully.
8

Introduction
to Digital
Health
Solutions
New technologies are but report that knowledge gained
fundamentally changing the way by other organizations and best This Playbook provides
people interact with health care. practices is not readily available. resources for the
Successful implementation of This Playbook series is an effort implementation of:
digital health technology will be to provide widespread access to
Telehealth
imperative for improving patient institutional knowledge and best
outcomes and ensuring financial practices currently held by experts If you are currently interested
stability for health care practices. in the field. in learning more about
telehealth, you can find
The landscape of digital health The Playbook series will be updated
more resources at
technology is seemingly endless to include new content over time.
ama-assn.org/practice-
and spans from clinical workflow As the series evolves, it will provide
management/digital/
solutions and data management helpful frameworks and resources
telehealth-resource-center-
to population health and patient for your practice related to specific
ama-policy-resources.
interaction tools. You’ve likely digital health solutions.
been exposed to or considered If you are interested in
implementing a number of learning more about
these solutions. implementing digital health
solutions, you can find other
Despite the increasing prevalence of
Playbooks in the Series at
digital health, many health system
ama-assn.org/digital-health-
leaders struggle to drive innovation
playbook.
in their organizations. They are
looking for a better, more efficient
path to scaled implementation,
9

PART 1 / WARM-UP
IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn ttoo TTeelleehheeaalltthh
For the purposes of this Playbook, we define telehealth as a digital health solution
that connects the patient and clinician through real-time audio and video
technology. It can be used as an alternative to traditional in-person care delivery
and, in certain circumstances, can be used to deliver care such as the diagnosis,
consultation, treatment, education, care management, and self-management
of patients.
WHAT IS TELEHEALTH?
Telehealth, telemedicine and related
terms generally refer to the exchange of medical
information from one site to another through electronic
communication. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) defines telehealth as a two-way, real-time interactive communication
between a patient and a physician or practitioner at a distant site through
telecommunications equipment that includes, at a minimum, audio and
visual equipment.
While telemedicine has historically eferred to remote clinical services,
telehealth can refer to broader services including:
Synchronous Telehealth Asynchronous Telehealth
• Real-time, audio-video communication that connects • Store-and-forward technologies that collect images
physicians and patients in different locations. Note: and data to be transmitted and interpreted later.
This definition is used for telehealth for CMS coverage
• Online digital visits and/or brief check-in services
and payment.
furnished using communication technology that are
• Real-time audio and telephone communications. employed to evaluate whether or not an office visit is
warranted (via patient portal, smartphone).
• Interprofessional internet consultations between
physicians and/or other qualified health care
professionals to improve care coordination for patients
by sharing verbal or written reports for further
assessment and/or care management.
10

COMMON USES FOR TELEHEALTH INCLUDE:
OVERCOMING
FOLLOW-UP CARE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
TRANSPORTATION BARRIERS
• Patients on treatment • Address shortages in local or • Access care from the
protocols who need close on-site mental health services convenience of the
follow-up care and multiple in rural or underserved patient’s home
visits to ensure compliance populations by connecting • For patients who face mobility
and manage medication patients to a specialist8 barriers and lack a caregiver or
• Care for chronic and complex • For routine follow-ups with assistance with transportation
conditions, including virtual anxiety, depression, and to the doctor’s office
consults on lab results, ADHD patients who are • Urgent care for established
symptom triage, lifestyle adjusting to new medications patients with low-risk,
management, and • Routine virtual infectious diseases, such as
remote patient monitoring psychotherapy appointments conjunctivitis or urinary
(RPM) check-ins tract infection
• Post-operative wound care • For long-term patients who
• Group education consults are temporarily relocated out
with prediabetic and diabetic of state
patients on healthy eating, • Pre-orthopedic surgery
exercise, and wellness tips preparation
• Expand access to and
expedite clinical trials
BENEFITS OF TELEHEALTH
Telehealth adoption allows health care providers to
increase continuity of care, extend access beyond normal
clinic hours, reduce patient travel burden, and help
BARRIERS TO TELEHEALTH
overcome clinician shortages, especially in rural and other
Although telehealth brings many benefits, we also
underserved populations6, which ultimately helps health
recognize the barriers to adopting such technology,
systems and physician practices focus more on chronic
including inconsistent reimbursement models9;
disease management, enhance patient wellness, improve
interstate licensure challenges10; legal and regulatory
efficiency, provide higher quality of care, and increase
issues11; concerns over security, privacy, and
patient satisfaction7. It can also be used to help reduce the
confidentiality12; lack of evidence about impact on health
spread of infectious diseases.
care costs, utilization, or outcomes13; concerns about
impacts to clinical duty to provide safe and effective
care (e.g., over-prescribing antibiotics in urgent care
settings)14; and logistical space challenges15.
11

PART 1 / WARM-UP
In 2016, the AMA conducted a study16 of
physicians’ motivations, current use of, and
requirements for the adoption of digital health
tools, including telehealth.
Our recent refresh of that digital health research indicated usage of telehealth has doubled from
14% in 2016 to 28% in 2019.17 Additionally, we saw the explosion of telehealth across the industry in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. While we continue to see expanded use increase, there is still work
to be done in optimizing and scaling telehealth that works for patients, physicians, and care teams. Recognizing
challenges still exist, this Playbook is designed to help you and your team overcome these barriers to adoption so
you may experience the many benefits of telehealth for your care team, your patients, and the broader community.
“Implementing a telehealth program “Behavioral health is a great use “Technology has made
is a winding road at first. It takes case for virtual care, and we look improvements; however institutional
a bit of patience and flexibility, but forward to expanding our tele- understanding, reimbursement,
it’s well worth it, and the end of the behavioral health offerings in 2020. and regulation challenges still exist.
road is satisfying for all involved.” It’s important for our organization to My goal for telehealth is for it to
provide the best possible care to our be more ubiquitous within health
—DR. SARITA NORI,
DERMATOLOGY, ATRIUS HEALTH patient population, and virtual visits care delivery. While I have seen the
provide another way for us to do so need for years, I am living the need
that enables us to meet patients and currently with aging parents who
families where they are. Virtual care do not have the access to efficient
is a key component of our enterprise telehealth services. With the aging
strategic plan in the coming years.” of our society, telehealth is going to
become more important for patients
—KELLY CROWN,
PROGRAM DIRECTOR, VIRTUAL CARE, and their caregivers.”
CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL
LOS ANGELES —DR. BRENT WRIGHT,
ASSOCIATE DEAN FOR RURAL HEALTH
INNOVATION, THE UNIVERSITY OF
LOUISVILLE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
12

Telehealth in Practice
CONTINUITY OF CARE Telehealth solutions allow clinicians to provide an improved patient
to offer more convenient options experience and continuity of care,
As telehealth vendors become
for followup and urgent care cases and maintain a strong patient-
more common and other urgent
to curb patient no-shows for in- clinician relationship.
care settings grow in popularity,
person appointments or patients
it’s important to consider how The AMA is focused on helping
turning to one-off interactions in
this market may impact overall confront the increasing chronic
convenient, urgent, and third-party
health outcomes by disrupting disease burden, especially
telehealth care settings. Although
continuity of care. In order to stay preventing or managing diabetes,
it’s suggested patients follow up
competitive and maintain that blood pressure, and substance
with their primary care physician
continuity of care, it’s increasingly use, and helping increase patient
after an urgent care or third-party
important for physicians, practices, care and physician satisfaction by
telehealth visit, this often does
and health systems to consider leveraging telehealth technology as
not happen. By offering telehealth
implementing telehealth in their an asset, not a burden.
in their own practices, clinicians
own environments.
and health systems will be able
13

PART 1 / WARM-UP
Telehealth
in Practice
Interstate Licensure
Telehealth rules and regulations vary state to state. If
your patient has out-of-state health insurance or wants
to receive care outside of your state, make sure that you
are meeting the state’s guidelines where your patient
is receiving care (e.g., reimbursement policies, clinician
licensure). Below is a checklist of items for consideration
before initiating telehealth in your practice:
UNDERSTANDING THE RULES ü Include your legal and billing team as early in the
process as possible to understand federal, state, and
Licensure and reimbursement are
payer requirements and regulations
two of the most common challenges
ü Identify in which states your clinicians need to be
to scaling telehealth in practice.
licensed as well as in which states they are
Investing time in understanding
currently licensed
some of the complexities of
ü Research interstate licensure, including the Interstate
implementing telehealth early in
Licensure Compact
the process could save time and
ü Check with your malpractice insurance carrier to
resources later.
ensure you are covered to provide telehealth services
14

Path to Payment q Understand the geographic restrictions for
an originating site as well as any restrictions
Each health system and practice must determine the on qualifications as a distant site
best reimbursement model for their system and q Consider focusing your telehealth program on
patient population. A few common reimbursement patients who use the primary payer at your
models include: practice, especially if they already cover telehealth
DOCUMENTATION IS
• BILL INSURANCE (E.G., PRIVATE, MEDICARE, MEDICAID):
CRITICAL TO REIMBURSEMENT
Although this model most closely reflects the
existing patient experience, it’s important to know Be sure to document when your visit begins and ends
that reimbursement rates vary by payer and there to meet the length requirements for payer and/or state.
may be specific criteria your platform and/or use Based on the requirements of coding and billing, keep
case must meet in order to be reimbursed. a checklist for how you have to document in order to
meet regulations. (Appendix E.1)
• OUT-OF-POCKET (E.G., $50–$100 PER TELEHEALTH VISIT):
STAY UP TO DATE
This model places a higher burden on patients and
treats telehealth more like a luxury than a necessity, but Telehealth rules, regulations, and reimbursement
it does allow it as an option if insurance reimbursement rates are continuously evolving, so ensure your
rates otherwise make telehealth a nonviable option. practice or organization is staying up to date with the
latest information by checking your state’s rules and
regulations and the reimbursement rates and guidelines
• FREE
for the payers most commonly used at your practice.
Although rare, some organizations choose to fund Below are some helpful links:
telehealth through grants or private endowment
• The AMA Advocacy Resource Center provides
funds to help meet broader health system or
materials for physicians and physician advocates
community needs such as increasing access to
focused on state telemedicine policies and issues.
care for rural or other underserved populations.
• Patient-physician relationship – Learn more
about the rules by state for establishing the
Practices that primarily plan to bill insurances
patient-physician relationship via telehealth and
should consider the following to ensure success:
telemedicine.
q Understand ins and outs of CPT® • The Federation of State Medical Boards provides
codes, including modifiers and correct telemedicine policies by state.
language to use (Appendix E.1) • The Center for Connected Health Policy has various
q Research which payers do and state-based resources including: Telehealth policy
do not cover telehealth and reimbursement by state and the state tracker
q Consider negotiating with individual payers covering topics such as regulatory, cross-state
regarding coverage and health outcomes licensing, and reimbursement
Disclaimer: Reimbursement-related information provided by the American Medical Association (“AMA”) and contained within this Playbook is for medical coding
guidance purposes only. It does not (i) supersede or replace the AMA’s Current Procedural Terminology (CPT®) manual (“CPT Manual”) or other coding authority, (ii)
constitute clinical advice, (iii) address or dictate payer coverage or reimbursement policy, or (iv) substitute for the professional judgment of the practitioner performing a
procedure who remains responsible for correct coding.
15

PART 1 / WARM-UP
The Path to
Implementation
The following step-by-step
process is intended to guide your
practice through the implementation
of a digital health solution.
As this is part of a Digital Health we know that the real world is We recommend
Implementation Series, the steps not always straightforward. Use reading through the
to implementation will likely this process as a guide while Playbook in its entirety
remain the same throughout the understanding that: before embarking on the path
series; however, each Playbook will to implementation so you know
q The order of steps may
focus on a different digital health what lies ahead. Then, once you’ve
shift based on your
modality. commenced the process in practice,
practice or organization
refer to each step in Part 2 and
The first six steps in Part 2 are q Some steps may overlap or may
Part 3 for best practices, checklists
fundamental to the initial planning be executed simultaneously
for success, and practice spotlight
of a telehealth program, and the q Some steps may take more
stories to guide you along your way.
subsequent six steps in Part 3 focus or less time than others
on more specific details of how to q You may need to reiterate
truly implement your telehealth or circle back to an earlier
program. While we have displayed step when expanding your
these steps chronologically, program or if challenges arise
16

TIMELINE OF STEPS
PART 2
IDENTIFYING A NEED
What’s the problem?
FORMING THE TEAM
Who needs to be involved
and when?
DEFINING SUCCESS
What are we trying to achieve?
EVALUATING THE VENDOR
What’s the right technology?
MAKING THE CASE
How do we get political and
financial buy-in?
CONTRACTING
PART 3 What’s our expected timing,
budget, and plan with our vendor?
DESIGNING THE WORKFLOW
What will need to change to
integrate this technology?
PREPARING THE CARE TEAM
Does everyone know what they
need to do to make this successful?
PARTNERING WITH THE PATIENT
What does the patient need?
IMPLEMENTING
How does it work in practice?
EVALUATING SUCCESS
Did it work?
SCALING
What’s next?
17

Part 2:
Pre-game
The following six steps will
serve as the general foundation
for planning for your
telehealth program and will
prepare you to embark on the
more detailed steps outlined
in Part 3, which will help you
with practical implementation.
18

19

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 1: IDENTIFYING A NEED
Step 1:
Identifying
a Need
Ground your telehealth
implementation in a true need.
Telehealth became an industry necessity amid COVID-19 in 2020, aiming to
minimize disease exposure and transmission, but it can also help address
opportunities or challenges physician practices and/or health systems face on
a regular basis. With that said, it is important to ensure this type of technology
is aligned with organizational priorities. Specifically, with telehealth, it’s also
important to understand legal, regulatory, and financial implications as early
on as possible to appropriately scope your program and avoid significant
roadblocks in the future. Brainstorm a list of your organization’s gaps in
care—where you lose efficiency, where your staff encounters pain
points, or where patients’ health or satisfaction suffers.
Prioritize issues identified by front-line staff that align with
your organization’s strategic goals, and determine which
can most likely be addressed by telehealth (revenue loss,
disruption in continuity of care, low compliance, clinician
shortages, and socioeconomic or geographical
barriers to in-person visits). Many organizations start
small, focusing on a target patient population,
department, or clinical need, with an established
plan to scale into other areas. The focus
on need will help justify your effort
with key stakeholders, sharpen your
implementation strategy, and help you
select the platform best suited to
your practice’s needs and workflow.
20

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH DURING IDENTIFYING A NEED
q Solicit feedback from staff to identify the q Identify what type of telehealth service
biggest pain points and opportunities that could be offered to solve this need
exist in your organization (Appendix A.1) (e.g., 1:1 follow-up care, connection
to specialists, group education)
q Identify areas of opportunity from
patients via satisfaction and/or experience q Evaluate your organization’s overall
survey responses and ensure that readiness for a telehealth solution
responses are reflective of the diversity (consider using this tool)
within your patient population
q Envision the expected outcome(s) if that
q Prioritize your list of pain points and problem were addressed (Appendix A.2)
opportunities based on severity of
need and fit with the strategic goals
q Identify legal, regulatory, or financial
of the organization (Appendix A.1)
restraints that could get in the
way of solving this need (e.g.,
q Identify problems that are most likely to reimbursement, interstate licensure,
be resolved by a telehealth solution data use, and ownership)
q Select a problem that, if solved, q Begin to establish a budget
would have the greatest value to your and funding source
entire organization and patients
WHY IDENTIFYING A NEED This practice also:
IS IMPORTANT
• Brings purpose and context to the project
Prioritize resources by • Forms the basis for program evaluation
• Helps crystalize buy-in from
centering your initiative around
key stakeholders
a true organizational need.
• Incites long-term stability for the project
21

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 1: IDENTIFYING A NEED
Identifying
a Need
LARGE PRACTICE CALLOUT
Prioritization can be
especially difficult for
large organizations.
BEST PRACTICE AVOIDING A MISSTEP It is difficult when key decision-
makers may not regularly
Look to your network. Evaluate the financial
interact with front-line staff. Seek
implications of feedback from care teams to
Seek out colleagues within or at
avoid misalignment between the
telehealth.
practices similar to yours who
organization’s strategic priorities
have previously counseled or
and the day-to-day needs of staff
Determine if your organization
executed the implementation
and patients.
or practice is financially ready
of a telehealth program. Foster
for telehealth by starting
open communication with these
to understand the cost of
advisors. If you are affiliated
implementation and how
with another practice or health
telehealth could have a positive
system, explore how they might
impact, whether that would be
support your implementation
through reimbursement, improved
with existing programs and/
patient experience, increased
or technology. Throughout the
access for patients, or reduced no-
implementation process, rely on
show rates.
their experience and advice as
you run into challenges.
22

“Telehealth was a solution that we came up
with because we wanted to be able to be there
for the patients, for everyone.”
—IT TEAM MEMBER, PRIVATE HOSPITAL
QUICK TIP
Frame your
need within a
Practice
larger context.
Spotlight
Identify how telehealth
intersects with your
organization’s broader
strategic goals around
Focus on resolvable issues.
creating community
and regional access,
Both patients and physicians build confidence in a new technology
addressing health equity,
quickly if it works the first time they try it. This principle holds true
and/or supporting
for using telemedicine as a new modality. One way to launch
emergency preparedness.
a successful telehealth program that has the potential to build
positive momentum and scale is to begin by focusing on a few chief
complaints that providers agree will be easily resolved by a video visit.
Those conditions, such as pink eye or certain rashes, can be triaged to
telehealth by patient education or nursing telephone lines. As both
patients and providers become accustomed to having their medical
complaints resolved through telemedicine, the system can then grow
the program by continuously adding additional chief complaints to
the triage that will most likely be resolved by telehealth. In this way,
both patients and providers can be confident that they can trust the
telemedicine service to meet their needs.
—DR. SYLVIA ROMM, PEDIATRICIAN AND CHIEF INNOVATION OFFICER,
ATLANTIC HEALTH SYSTEM
23

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 2: FORMING THE TEAM
Step 2:
Forming
the Team
The success of any implementation
depends on engaging the right people.
Telehealth implementation is a team effort that requires on-
the-ground knowledge, open communication, and long-term
commitment for success. While you won’t need to directly engage
all the teams right away, it’s helpful to identify who will be on
which teams and consider when and how different players will
be involved (Appendix B.3). Roles and responsibilities will vary,
depending on the size of your organization, but it is important to
include perspectives from all departments that will be impacted
by telehealth, including clinical, financial, administrative,
IT, and legal champions. Consider organizing your key
stakeholders into four teams: Core, Leadership, Advisory, and
Implementation based on the criteria and responsibilities
outlined in Appendix B.1.
Telehealth programs can take months to launch,
so the kickoff meeting should gain stakeholder
alignment on objectives, concerns, important
dates, and approval protocols for the
entire implementation process. A clear
and thorough understanding of your
organization’s needs and internal
processes will help you avoid
missteps and ensure a smoother
collaboration with your telehealth
vendor for launch.
24

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH DURING FORMING THE TEAM
q Identify the key members of your q Set up regular meetings
Core, Leadership, Advisory, and with your Core team
Implementation teams (Appendix B.1; B.2)
q Solicit input from your
q Host a kickoff meeting to outline and Implementation team
communicate the responsibilities and
time commitment required of each
q Set key checkpoints with the
team member (Appendix B3; B.4)
Advisory team at least one month
in advance to stay on schedule
q Discuss financial, IT, and legal
considerations at kickoff meeting
q Pre-seed your program intent with key
members of your Leadership team
q Set clear dates for Cross-Committee
action on Selecting a Vendor, Making
q Set up weekly emails to make sure
the Case, and First Implementation
communication is open between
teams and departments
WHY FORMING THE TEAM IS IMPORTANT
Having the right people involved
upfront provides diverse perspectives.
These different viewpoints are critical to the planning
and implementation of telehealth, as they help to:
• Anticipate barriers from all angles
• Facilitate buy-in
• Distribute workload
• Minimize workflow disruption during implementation
25

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 2: FORMING THE TEAM
Forming
the Team
LARGE PRACTICE CALLOUT BEST PRACTICE
Find a home for Keep the end
telehealth within user in mind.
your organization.
The foundation of your
implementation should be informed
Determine where telehealth AVOIDING A MISSTEP
by the people you are designing
will be housed within your
for so the solution is tailored to suit Carefully consider who
organizational structure (e.g.,
their needs. Consider who will be
part of IT, innovation, its own needs to be at the table.
most impacted by telehealth—
committee or task force) in order
including clinicians, care team
to establish an accountability It’s possible to have too many
members, patients, and support
framework, protect your budget players involved, which could slow
roles such as schedulers and billers
and resources and avoid down the process. Alternatively,
—and solicit feedback early on.
overlapping roles missing a key person or role
Ensure diverse perspectives are
and responsibilities. during the planning stages can
represented and considered
result in rework or difficulties with
throughout the implementation
developing buy-in.
process.
26

“At a small practice, you couldn’t possibly do everything
there is to do with just one person taking it on all
themselves. Everybody has to have a part and share.
They say ‘teamwork makes the dream work.’”
—LEAH, PHYSICIAN’S ASSISTANT,
CHICAGO ARTHRITIS, LLC
Practice
QUICK TIP
Spotlight
Pre-seed your
idea with the
Leadership team.
Clear roles and responsibilities ensure success
Use standing meetings as engaged teams shift throughout process.
or casual conversations
to keep Leadership team When starting their telehealth implementation process, a Director
members updated on of Nursing and the team at her hospital knew it was essential to
your telehealth program. have the right individuals on the core teams, even if each member’s
Share your intent, what engagement would flex throughout implementation. They found
organization-wide impact it important to include members representing risk management,
telehealth could have safety, IT and biomed as well as physicians, administrative staff, the
(e.g., increasing revenue, Chief Financial Officer (CFO), the Chief Information Officer (CIO), and
improving patient representatives from the specialty in which the initial implementation
retention, expanding will take place. Although each representative’s time and resource
patient access, increasing investment shifted throughout the process as sometimes all team
the organization’s members were needed while at others only certain parts of the team
reputation for being were needed, it was important to identify each of these key players
innovative), and provide early on and establish clear roles, responsibilities, and expectations.
initial exposure to your
implementation before —DIRECTOR OF NURSING, HOSPITAL
seeking official approval
to secure high-level
sponsorship and increase
buy-in potential.
27

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 3: DEFINING SUCCESS
Step 3:
Defining
Success
Define what success looks like early.
Once you’re aligned with your Core team on the key need for
telehealth and vision for success, use this step to set specific
short- and long-term goals with measurable metrics using the
AMA Return on Health framework (Appendix E.4) and a process
for tracking your progress to guide your team along the way. List
the anticipated benefits18 of your telehealth program from the
patient, clinician, and Leadership team’s perspective as well as
the limitations already identified by your key stakeholders
to form your initial definition of success. Outline a phased
approach with endpoints for growth and expansion.
28

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH DURING DEFINING SUCCESS
q List benefits of your telehealth q Ensure each goal is S.M.A.R.T.
program for patients, clinicians, and (Appendix C.2)
your organization as a whole
q Set up a process or system to collect
q Reground yourself in the financial, data and track progress against the goals
legal, and operational limitations (keeping in mind that vendors’ platforms
your stakeholders have identified, may have analytics capabilities)
especially reimbursement and interstate
licensure limitations (Appendix E.1)
q Establish specific checkpoints
to collect data
q Research the various ways the
telehealth solution you are considering
q Set clear endpoint criteria to reevaluate
can deliver value for your practice
as needed or to scale the program
or organization (Appendix E.4)
q Identify 3–5 goals that are most q Plan for how and when you’ll establish
baseline metrics as a comparison
important for your entire practice or
point for your program’s success
organization (e.g., continuity of care,
reimbursable interactions, appointment
compliance, patient satisfaction,
q Plan for how and when you’ll evaluate
physician satisfaction, access to care)
success after initial implementation
q Identify which metrics are
most appropriate for assessing
progress toward these goals
WHY DEFINING SUCCESS IS IMPORTANT This helps:
• Set realistic expectations for your program
Envisioning success brings clarity to
• Identify the right vendors
the goal you are trying to achieve by
• Rally the team around a common goal
using telehealth. • Bring rigor to tracking metrics
29

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 3: DEFINING SUCCESS
Defining Success
BEST PRACTICE
Align your goals to the
AVOIDING A MISSTEP
Quadruple Aim of Healthcare,
inclusive of Health Equity. Establish a baseline.
By focusing on health outcomes, improving the Don’t forget to define and document
patient experience, reducing cost, and/or increasing where you currently are across all success metrics
clinician satisfaction, you will inevitably impact the before the implementation of your program. This will
end user, care team, and patient in a positive way. help you make the case for the program’s success
Consider ways telehealth can also help your practice by demonstrating how telehealth has specifically
address health inequities by expanding access and contributed to your larger goals rather than only being
initiating partnerships across the community. These able to highlight an increased number of telehealth
goals are also more likely to align with the strategic appointments. Measuring true impact from the
imperatives of your organization, which will be an telehealth program will be nearly impossible without a
advantage when seeking approval and resources later clear understanding of your baseline.
in the process. (Appendix C.1)
QUICK TIP
See how digital health solutions (e.g., telehealth) could
Explore how digital health help your practice or organization meet the participation
requirements for programs such as the Quality Payment
solutions fit into
Program (QPP), Merit-based Incentive Payment System
government programs. (MIPS), and/or Alternative Payment Models (APMs).
30

“Having a vision for success helps with buy-in
and budget from the organization’s leaders.”
—SHANNON VOGEL, DIRECTOR OF HEALTH
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (HIT),
TEXAS MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (TMA)
Practice
Spotlight
Clearly defined success metrics
ultimately help highlight program success.
When beginning their telehealth implementation, Angela and
her colleagues at Privia Medical group knew it was important
to clearly define success metrics so they could easily measure
possible progress made with patients as well as the overall
telehealth program’s success. The team agreed on defining
success as improved outcomes, strengthened patient/physician
communication, and increased compliance, which allowed them
to clearly track success as they initially implemented telehealth
with patients with cases such as ADHD medication checks,
urgent care infectious disease cases, minor traumas, and patients
with protocols needing close follow-up such as Lyme disease.
Starting with a clear vision of success allowed the team to
highlight improvements made with each metric and, ultimately,
the telehealth program’s success.
—ANGELINA FARELLA, PEDIATRICIAN, PRIVIA MEDICAL GROUP
31

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 4: EVALUATING THE VENDOR
Step 4:
Evaluating
the Vendor
Evaluate possible vendors across key
criteria that will enable your goals.
Many electronic health record (EHR) vendors have functionality
that provides practices with the ability to facilitate telehealth
visits. This is a great way to build your existing relationship
and ensure seamless integration. If you do seek a new, outside
vendor, go into the process with the intent of finding someone
who will be a long-term partner and not just someone to
execute a transaction. Select a shortlist of quality vendors by
speaking with organizations or practices similar to yours
or reaching out to your state medical association for
recommendations. Alternatively, attending health care
technology conferences like HIMSS (and local HIMSS
chapters), American Telemedicine Association,
HLTH, or Rock Health; collaborating with a health
care accelerator or incubator; or leveraging
the AMA’s Physician Innovation Network19
to connect with one of 1,500+ companies
can expose you to possible vendors
and practical solutions.
32

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH DURING EVALUATING THE VENDOR
q Begin with your network, including q Ask for case studies and referrals
asking for word-of-mouth referrals
from experienced practices early on
q Schedule live vendor demos with
and researching third-party reviews
select members of the Core, Advisory,
and Implementation teams
q Research potential vendors and talk with
your EHR vendor for existing options
q Evaluate vendors across six critical
that may be available through your
factors: Business, Information Technology,
existing technology infrastructure
Security, Usability, Customer Service,
and Clinical Validation (Appendix D.1)
q Build a Request for Proposal (RFP), clearly
outlining the goals you identified in Step 3
q Narrow your options to one or
two preferred vendors to include
q Send RFPs to vendors that most in your pitch to leadership
closely align to your goals
q Use established criteria to make the
q Review RFP responses alongside evaluation process simple for leadership
key representatives from the when Making the Case (Step 5)
Core and Advisory teams
WHY EVALUATING THE VENDOR IS IMPORTANT
Select a vendor who is worthy of a
long-term partnership.
This ensures you will have:
• An expert resource always on hand in challenging situations
• Support throughout your implementation process, from start to
finish (and beyond)
• A partner who is equally motivated as you to achieve a
successful outcome
33

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 4: EVALUATING THE VENDOR
Evaluating
the Vendor
BEST PRACTICE
Evaluate vendors across six key
variables to find your best partner.
If you’re struggling to identify a vendor that’s right for
you, consider engaging external resources, such as
the American Telemedicine Association or your state
medical association/society for support. Remember
to incorporate legal feedback and security standards
to make sure risk and liability are properly assessed
(Appendix E.2) and reference the
AMA’s Privacy Principles.
34

SELECTING A VENDOR GUIDE (Appendix D.2)
1. BUSINESS: 2. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: 3. SECURITY: (APPENDIX D.3)
• Organizational overviewI— • Ability to integrate with your • Supports compliance with
tenure, funding source, financial current IT landscape, particularly HIPAA rules, such as willingness
stability, affiliations, notable your EHR system to sign a Business Associate
customers, etc. • Cost, process, and timeline Agreement (BAA)
• Impact to program ROI— associated with integration and • Third-party audits
product cost, business model, product updates (SOC 2, HITRUST)
reimbursement rates, risk sharing, • Ability to capture data • Liability structure for managing
support payment program important to care team potential security breaches
participation, etc. and patient20 • User authentication
• Expertise in offering telehealth to • Patient geolocation and authorization
your specialty for licensure • Transparency on collected data
• Knowledge of federal and private • Customization capabilities use processes
payer requirements • Patient access to data • Local regulatory compliance (i.e.,
• Commitment to organizational • Ability to maintain patient State Medical Board)
diversity, equity, and inclusion identity across platforms • In-platform
• Biometrics/RPM consent capabilities
integration capability
• Information blocking and
interoperability requirements
(as applicable)
• Impact analysis on your internet
and local network usage
4. CUSTOMER SERVICE: 5. USABILITY: 6. CLINICAL VALIDATION:
• Level of support available • User experience of platform for • Documented
to practice during and after patients and care team members clinical outcomes
implementation—staff training, • Patient and care team • Published peer-reviewed
patient education, project engagement metrics research
management, data analysis and • Dashboard/workflow assimilation • Product and outcomes
insights, etc. • Multi-specialty application research includes patients from
• What technology does the • Platform launch process historically marginalized and
patient need and does the and timing minoritized populations
vendor support this? • Ease of billing/payout for patients
• Degree of technical support and health systems/practices
available to patients • Diverse users considered in the
• Access to existing procedures development and design of the
and templates technology and user experience
35

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 4: EVALUATING THE VENDOR
Evaluating
the Vendor
SMALL PRACTICE CALLOUT LARGE PRACTICE
CALLOUT
Value-adds make a
Anticipate scale from the
big difference for a
beginning of your project.
small group.
Discuss expectations about when
AVOIDING A MISSTEP If you are worried about not
and how you intend to scale your
having the internal resources to
program. If you are hoping to scale
Do your
support your implementation,
a program to a large number of
due diligence. talk with vendors about value-
patients, consider whether vendors
added services they may
have the resources and infrastructure
Don’t rely on the sales pitch to be able to provide, such as
to support a large-scale rollout
provide all the information you need. project management, staff and
within your expected time frame.
Ask for case studies and referrals to patient training, emergency IT
support the pitch and ask to speak support, patient engagement
with the product engineers and management, etc.
existing customers to gain a realistic
picture of the process to integrate
this telehealth solution into your
organization. While financial perks
such as free trials are tempting,
remember to look for a vendor
worthy of a long-term partnership.
36

An important aspect when evaluating a vendor is making sure
that your patient data is your patient data, and is no way
about to be sold, used, de-identified, anonymized,
and packaged off to somebody else.
—CLINT PHILLIPS, FOUNDER AND CEO OF MEDICI
Practice
Spotlight
QUICK TIP
Test technology with
a patient advocate, Filter vendors by compliance
member of a patient with your state’s regulations.
advisory board, or staff
Kristen spent over six months researching the right
member unfamiliar telehealth vendor for her small endocrinology practice,
primarily to serve non-urgent established diabetic patients
with the project.
to help give them quality medical advice and quality
medical care in a convenient manner. Kristen consulted with
Technology may be too
other medical offices and health organizations, began with a
complicated if your test users
simple Google search, and narrowed her options down from
cannot operate the equipment or
50 to five companies, using legal compliance as the first
process on their own without the
and foremost basis of her criteria. She contacted COPIC, the
help of vendor training.
Colorado insurance malpractice company, who informed
her team that their telehealth partner must support
compliance with HIPAA rules and provide a teleconsent, that
the patient signs to consent to receive telehealth each visit.
By understanding legal restraints early on, Kristen was able
to set her practice up for success.
—KRISTEN S, PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT,
ENDOCRINOLOGY PRACTICE
37

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 5: MAKING THE CASE
Step 5:
Making
the Case
Compile the content you’ve gathered
into a Leadership team proposal.
Gaining buy-in from your Leadership team is a key element of long-term
success for your telehealth program. Without broader buy-in, it can be
challenging to source the resources and prioritize the time needed to make
implementation successful. As you build your telehealth program proposal,
be sure to share the problem you’ve identified, how telehealth can solve
that problem, can deliver value, and is aligned with organizational goals.
Additionally, you’ll, want to outline what success looks like and the
metrics you will use to keep the team informed of progress. You
will also introduce which vendor is most suited for the job based
on the initial evaluations and how partnering with them will
deliver a positive Return on Health (ROH) for the organization.
WHY MAKING THE CASE IS IMPORTANT Communicating your vision opens up the opportunity to:
• Gain valuable input to improve your program
Making the case is integral to
• Secure funding
getting your organization or
• Obtain program sponsors to champion the success
practice on board. of your program throughout the organization as
you scale
38

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH DURING MAKING THE CASE
q Clearly define resources needed to move forward with this implementation (funds, additional staff,
additional bandwidth, political support, official approval, etc.)
q Estimate the budget required to obtain the resources to implement your program including vendor
services, equipment, marketing, education, EHR integration, additional personnel resources, etc.
q Estimate the value your solution will contribute to the organization if goals are
achieved achieved using the AMA’s Return on Health framework (Appendix E.4)
q Calculate the ROH of your implementation considering the budget and value you’ve estimated
q Align your implementation with organizational objectives/goals to justify why this is a priority
q Research coding and payment available for your chosen digital health solution
(Appendix E.1) and assess your liability and risk (Appendix E.2)
q Reach out to malpractice insurance carrier to ensure proper coverage
q Compile all necessary information in a proposal to the key decision-makers to obtain
approval and resources to support your implementation. Below are a few examples of
how organizations are using the Return on Health framework to “make the case:”
• Virginia Commonwealth University Health—Telepsychiatry during COVID-19
• Ochsner Health—Hypertension digital medicine program
• Massachusetts General Health—Teleneurology and telestroke
• Cityblock Health—Complex care coordination
39

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 5: MAKING THE CASE
Making the Case
BEST PRACTICE
Use storytelling to
engage others in
your initiative.
Different decision-makers will AVOIDING A MISSTEP
have varying priorities and
Lean into how
interests. Take time to consider
what will be most motivational you’ll overcome
to your organization. Emphasize
reimbursement and
the ROI metrics that will resonate
licensure challenges.
with your stakeholders. Look
SMALL PRACTICE CALLOUT
for opportunities to share your
Although it may be easy to
passion and drive excitement Don’t skip this step
skip over challenging topics
around the project by sharing
even if official alignment
like reimbursement models,
personal stories that led you to
interstate licensure, and state- isn’t necessary.
want to implement telehealth
specific laws and regulations,
in practice, and leverage your
including information in your In a small practice, you may not
patients or a patient advisory
proposal about how you’ll need to pitch to a board of directors
board to strengthen your proposal
address and work within these or your CEO for approval. However,
with stories of how telehealth
challenges shows leadership that thoroughly evaluating budget and
would impact their lives.
your team is realistic about both ROI against your objectives will help
the benefits and challenges of determine the impact telehealth
implementing telehealth. will have on your practice. Thinking
through key business elements of
your project helps you strengthen
your plan and increase your
probability for success.
40

“Telehealth can help boost revenue for our physicians by
QUICK TIP turning on-call hours into billable time, attracting new
patients, reducing no-shows, and even reducing overhead
Explore all
for physicians who decide to switch to a flexible
opportunities
work-from-home model for part of the week.”
for funding.
Come to leadership with —CHAD, ADMINISTRATOR,
INTERNAL MEDICINE PRACTICE
a plan for how to fund the
project, highlighting various
options including those
beyond traditional funding
through reimbursements.
That could include creative
Practice
external funding sources,
such as government grants,
accelerator sponsorships, Spotlight
or community support.
Practices should also inquire
about discounts and freebies
with vendors. For internal Standardize and simplify the decision-
funding, consider where there
making process for senior leadership.
is room in the budget and
what departments might be
Getting buy-in was essential to a successful telehealth launch at a
willing to pitch in and discuss
federally qualified health center, so the Head of Behavioral Health
current opportunities for
needed to make the case to the Vice President of Medical at her
reimbursement with your
organization as well as the rest of the executive board. With the aim
practice or organizational
of improving behavioral and psychiatry services for underserved and
payer contracting team.
rural populations, she used evidence-based metrics to demonstrate
that telehealth has promising outcomes. The Head of Behavioral
Health’s core telehealth committee of three interviewed different
telehealth vendors and created a cost-benefit analysis of each,
narrowing it down to three bids. She created a clear matrix that
compared her key areas of evaluation across the three vendors:
the services they offer, the cost, how they rate on policies and
procedures, how they rate on customer services, and references
that the organization could check. Each vendor was invited to give a
demonstration to the executive board. With a clear, organized plan,
the Head of Behavioral Health’s senior leadership was able to make a
cogent decision on the right telehealth partner for their organization.
—HEAD OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH,
FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTER
41

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 6: CONTRACTING
Step 6:
Contracting
Lay the groundwork for a successful
long-term vendor relationship.
Think beyond financial considerations to align on
expectations for how you’ll work together and
communicate. Discuss the level of support or training
you’ll expect from them as your partner, and
think creatively about where they can provide
additional value or share the risk with your
organization. Ensure your negotiations and
agreed parameters are clearly captured in
key legal documents that protect both
you and your existing EHR vendor or
new partner.
42

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH
DURING CONTRACTING
q Secure any remaining approvals within your
organization to proceed with contracting
q Negotiate terms (financial investment, customer support,
additional services, upgrade schedule, success metrics, etc.)
q Document clear and measurable definitions of success for
your working relationship and the initiative at large
q Identify the timeline for the current contract and
outline when terms will be renegotiated
q Clearly outline the plan to scale your program, and
align on any relevant contingency plans
q Work with your legal, financial, procurement, or IT teams as necessary to
get the new contract signed or existing contract updated (Appendix F.1)
WHY CONTRACTING IS IMPORTANT Disclaimer: This document is for informational
purposes only. It is not intended as medical,
legal, financial, or consulting advice or as a
A strong contract underpins substitute for the advice of an attorney or
other financial or consulting professional. It
a successful long-term does not address all possible legal and other
issues that may arise with the acquisition of
relationship by providing: a health information technology product
or service. Each health care organization is
unique and will need to consider its particular
circumstances and requirements, which
• Aligned expectations
cannot be contemplated or addressed in this
• Written, agreed-upon terms to hold each Playbook. A health care organization should
seek legal counsel from an experienced
party accountable
attorney whenever it proposes to enter into a
• Legal protection for you and your vendor legally binding agreement.
43

PART 2 / PRE-GAME
STEP 6: CONTRACTING
Contracting
BEST PRACTICE
Think about your
contract as a “Path to
Commitment.”
If your original contract only AVOIDING A MISSTEP
covers an initial rollout of your
Understand who
solution, spend time talking with
your vendor about what that has access to your
larger contract will look like when
patients’ data.
you are ready to expand. Your
scaling plan should consider each
Many practices don’t realize that SMALL PRACTICE
partner’s financial investments, CALLOUT
a digital health service might
timing considerations, and success
be low cost or free because the
metrics. Clear expectations upfront Explore external
vendor’s business model is based
will help build a healthy, long-term
on aggregating and selling patients’ resources.
partnership. If for some reason the
data. Ensure you are aware of the
relationship is not successful, make
vendor’s privacy practices, intended If you don’t have an internal legal
sure you have a clearly defined
data use, and your access to the and/or compliance team, you
exit plan built into your contract
data. Consult with your legal team may want to invest in obtaining
to protect your practice from
and clarify how video, audio, and input from a compliance or
unnecessary risk.
other data are being captured and legal expert. Some state medical
stored by the vendor and who has associations/societies may
access. Ensure the vendor is willing be able to provide support.
to sign a HIPAA Business Associate Otherwise, securing outside legal
Agreement (BAA). counsel is recommended.
44

QUICK TIP
Negotiate beyond
Practice
finances.
Spotlight
While your contract obviously
needs to lay out the financial terms
of the deal, you may also be able
to negotiate for the inclusion of
Ensure easy access to data collection
additional services and future
upgrades. Ask about ways your when contracting to save time later
vendor can provide support pre-
when evaluating success.
and post-implementation (training,
tech support, workflow design
Rather than waiting until the end of initial implementation
collaboration, data analysis, project
to secure access to data needed to support your key
management, etc.).
success metrics, David Cooper of Xealth finds it’s best to
ensure ongoing access to this data upfront when building
out your vendor contract. This way, your team is not held
back waiting on data access when they are trying to
measure success and show your Leadership team how the
telehealth program performed.
—DAVID COOPER, MANAGER,
STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIPS, XEALTH
45

Part 3:
Game Time –
Telehealth
As you move from planning to
implementation, your path will require
even more detail specific to how the
telehealth technology will integrate
into your practice. The remaining steps
focus on the unique details to consider,
including the development of modified
or new workflows, preparing care teams
and patients, and how to measure
success and expand the program.
46

47

PART 3 / GAME TIME
STEP 7: DESIGNING THE WORKFLOW
Step 7:
Designing
the Workflow
Document an updated
workflow for telehealth visits.
Telehealth appointments will likely require an adjusted workflow to
ensure that you are offering a positive experience for both your
patients and care team. Daily logistics such as your physical
workspace arrangement, appointment scheduling procedure,
staff time, and communication may have to be altered to
integrate telehealth into your organization. Consider how
to incorporate telehealth appointments with the least
amount of workflow disruption, especially at first, to
help seamlessly introduce the technology to your
practice. Seek to understand the preferences and
needs of both patients and clinicians, such as
the times of day that may work best for them
and what types of barriers they may have to
engaging in a telehealth visit, to ensure
your workflow accounts for these details.
48

GOALS TO ACCOMPLISH DURING DESIGNING THE WORKFLOW
q Engage the Implementation team to q Assign clear roles and responsibilities for any new
provide input on workflow design actions necessary for integration (Appendix H.1)
q Solicit feedback from a diverse group of patients q Document a new workflow that
to understand their needs, times of day that incorporates necessary changes
may work best for appointments, and barriers
they may have to engaging in a telehealth visit
q Partner with your vendor to identify opportunities
for efficiency (e.g., patient communication,
q Document your existing clinical and rooming, etc.) based on your team’s needs
administrative workflow and identify where
updates may be necessary (Appendix G.1)
q Engage your IT team and/or vendor to understand
how to best integrate your workflow into your EHR
q Identify updated procedures, such as patient and establish a plan for emergency tech support
and case identification, appointment scheduling,
patient training, appointment logistics,
q Develop resources to support and socialize the
consent, platform assistance, and billing
new workflow (written procedures for each
department, communication templates)
q Ensure care will still be provided in a fully
legally compliant way (e.g., follows fraud
q Create a proper environment that will
and abuse laws, privacy standards, and
support successful telehealth visits (e.g.,
other applicable legal requirements)
strong Wi-Fi connection, sufficient internet
bandwidth, quiet/private space, clear
q Define clear triage protocols for when a video of clinician) (Appendix G.4)
telehealth appointment is appropriate
(Appendix G.3) and ensure the clinic
q Conduct internal telehealth test visits
staff and scheduling teams are trained
to distinguish when it is an acceptable
alternative to an in-person appointment
q If you’ve introduced new technology, make sure
you conduct a HIPAA Security Risk Assessment
q Identify what support clinicians and staff will
need to effectively complete a telehealth visit18
q Collect patient and staff feedback
and iterate as necessary
49

PART 3 / GAME TIME
STEP 7: DESIGNING THE WORKFLOW
Workflow
Design
WHY DESIGNING THE
WORKFLOW IS IMPORTANT
Telehealth is a new way for practices
to interact with patients.
A clear workflow is vital to ensure everyone understands
their role and how to maximize the value of telehealth
through procedures that:
• Set clear patient and provider expectations
• Ensure telehealth is used for clinically relevant
purposes and adheres to licensure, policy, and
reimbursement requirements
• Streamline the patient experience
• Preserve the patient-clinician relationship
50